Background
==========

Congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles (CFEOM) and Duane syndrome (DS) are complex strabismus disorders that present with congenital restrictive ophthalmoplegia with or without ptosis. These disorders were traditionally believed to reflect primary structural extraocular muscle (EOM) anomalies and have been referred to as \'congenital fibrosis syndromes\' \[[@B1]\]. Neuropathology studies of DS \[[@B2],[@B3]\] and one form of CFEOM (CFEOM1) \[[@B4]\], and the identification of *ARIX* as the gene mutated in a second form of CFEOM (CFEOM2) \[[@B5]\], however, support our hypothesis that CFEOM results from maldevelopment of the oculomotor (nIII) and/or trochlear (nIV) nuclei and DS results from maldevelopment of the abducens (nVI) nucleus. The continued definition of these phenotypes and identification of the underlying disease genes will assist clinical diagnostics and lead to a better understanding of the unique developmental features of the oculomotor lower motor neuron unit.

Although several distinct CFEOM phenotypes have been defined \[[@B6]-[@B8]\], each likely resulting from maldevelopment of a unique combination of alpha motor neurons in nIII and/or nIV, most reports of CFEOM families describe a stereotypical clinical phenotype. The affected members of these pedigrees are born with bilateral ptosis and restrictive ophthalmoplegia. The primary vertical position of each eye is downward and cannot be elevated above the midline. On forced duction testing there is resistance to passive movement of the globe. Although the primary position of both eyes is infraducted, there is variability in the secondary position of each eye (i.e. exotropic, esotropic, or neutral), and the degree of residual horizontal movement within the lower quadrants (full to completely restricted). This CFEOM phenotype was first described in the medical literature in 1840 \[[@B9]\] and was recognized to occur as a familial trait in 1879 \[[@B10]\]. Subsequently, families segregating this phenotype have been published under myriad names \[[@B1],[@B4],[@B6],[@B11]-[@B21]\]. We now refer to individuals with this phenotype as having \"classic CFEOM\" and to families in which all affected members have this phenotype as \" CFEOM1 pedigrees\". We previously mapped a CFEOM1 locus, referred to as *FEOM1,* to a ≤ 3 cM region spanning the centromere of chromosome 12, flanked by *D12S1584 (AFM136xf6)* on the p-arm and *D12S1668 (AFMb320wd9)* on the q-arm \[[@B6],[@B15]\].

In addition to families with CFEOM1, we have identified several less common familial CFEOM phenotypes (CFEOM2 and CFEOM3). These phenotypes are classified as CFEOM based on the presence of affected members with congenital restrictive ophthalmoplegia affecting extraocular muscles in the nIII/nIV distribution. By definition, however, one or more affected family members do not have the classic CFEOM phenotype. In families with CFEOM2, the eyes of affected family members are fixed in an exotropic, or outward, position. Thus far, this phenotype segregates as an autosomal recessive trait and maps to the *FEOM2* locus on chromosome 11q13 \[[@B8]\], and affected individuals carry homozygous mutations in *ARIX*\[[@B5]\]. *ARIX* encodes a homeodomain transcription factor required for nIII and nIV development in mice and zebrafish \[[@B22],[@B23]\]. In families with CFEOM3, the CFEOM phenotype is variably expressed. Some affected members have classic CFEOM. Others, however, are unilaterally affected, the primary position of the eye is orthotropic rather than infraducted, and/or the eye can be raised into the upper quadrants. Thus far, this phenotype segregates as an autosomal dominant trait and maps to either *FEOM3* on 16qter \[[@B7]\] or to *FEOM1*\[[@B24]\].

In our attempt to understand phenotype-genotype correlations between specific CFEOM phenotypes and *FEOM* loci, we noted that the CFEOM1 phenotype in all pedigrees reported to date maps to the *FEOM1* locus. To determine if CFEOM1 is indeed genetically homogeneous, we identified all unpublished CFEOM1 pedigrees in our database, analyzed them for linkage to the *FEOM* loci, and found that most but not all were consistent with linkage to *FEOM1.* The two small pedigrees not linked to *FEOM1* were consistent with linkage to *FEOM3.* In addition, to further define the spectrum of human *ARIX* mutations, we identified all CFEOM1 families consistent with linkage to *FEOM2* or sporadic individuals with classic CFEOM and determined that none harbored mutations in the *ARIX* gene.
