Background
==========

The introduction of small subunit ribosomal RNA as a tool in microbial taxonomy by Carl Woese and George Fox \[[@B1]\] led most microbiologists to assume that the concepts of animal and plant taxonomy could be extended to the realm of prokaryotes. In particular, it was assumed that a natural taxonomic system for microorganisms was feasible \[[@B2]\]. The goal of a natural taxonomic system is the formation of taxonomic groups that are defined by shared ancestry \[[@B3]\]. By definition, an ancestor that defines a monophyletic group can only give rise to members of this group. No organism outside this group has a lineage that traces back to the same ancestor (paraphyletic group); however, there might be earlier ancestors that define more inclusive monophyletic groups. The metaphor for organismal evolution that underlies a natural taxonomic system is a strictly bifurcating tree of species. A decade ago ribosomal RNA promised that one day it might be possible to place every extant organism on a universal tree of life, and the hope was that more genomic sequences would make this placement more accurate.

However, the analyses of completely sequenced genomes initiated a reassessment of concepts in microbial evolution \[[@B4]\]. While some molecular markers were found to agree with one another e.g., \[[@B5]\], others do not \[[@B6]-[@B12]\]. Transfer of genetic information between divergent organisms has turned the tree of life into a net or web \[[@B13]\], and genomes into mosaics. Different parts of genomes have different histories, and representing the history of genome evolution as a single tree appears inconsistent with the data. Nevertheless, the assumption of a tree-like process still underlies many approaches. Genome content trees have been calculated based on the presence and absence of genes \[[@B14]-[@B16]\] or types of protein folds \[[@B17]\]. While there is limited agreement between genome and rRNA phylogeny, at present it remains unclear whether this similarity is based on shared ancestry of part of a less frequently exchanging genome core \[[@B18]\], or if the apparent congruence is itself the result of horizontal gene transfer \[[@B19]\].

Overall genome content is not best represented on a single tree. Fig. [1](#F1){ref-type="fig"} gives an example of an alternative depiction, where thickness of a line reflects percentage of genes shared between two genomes. The coherence among the three domains of life (Bacteria, Archaea, Eucarya \[[@B20]\]), is clearly reflected in genome content; i.e., Archaea share more genes with other Archaea than with Bacteria, but many features are incompatible with representing the relationships between different genomes as a tree. For example, the mesophilic euryarchaeon *Halobacterium* sp. has more genes in common with the mesophilic Bacteria than does the thermophilic crenarchaeote *Aeropyrum pernix*. However, the extremophilic euryarcheote *Archaeoglobus fulgidus* shares many more genes with the extremophilic bacteria, *Aquifex aeolicus* and *Thermotoga maritima* than does *Halobacterium*. While this example illustrates the web-like relationships among genomes, recent phylogenetic reconstructions from molecular data have explored only few alternatives to the tree-paradigm (e.g. \[[@B21],[@B22]\]).

![Star Like Representation of Genome Relationships. The diagram depicts pairwise comparisons among thirteen genomes. Every genome is represented as a point on the perimeter of a circle. The thickness of the line connecting two genomes reflects the percentage of shared genes between the genomes. The thickest line connecting *Aquifex aeolicus* and *Thermotoga maritima* corresponds to 51% shared genes, and the thinnest line connecting *Aeropyrum pernix* and *Borrelia burgdorferi* corresponds to 9% shared genes. A gene is considered shared when it had a BLAST hit in the other genome with an E-value below 10^-8^. The percentage of genes shared between genomes A and B is calculated as ((\#of genes in A shared with B/total \# of genes in A)+(\# of genes in B shared with A/total \# of genes in B))/2. Bacteria are depicted in green, Archaea in red and Eukaryotes in blue. The domain affiliation is also indicated by a letter following the species name (A: Archaea, B: Bacteria, and E: Eukaryotes).](1471-2164-3-4-1){#F1}
