Background
==========

Identification of species with molecular probes is likely to revolutionize taxonomy, at least for taxa with morphological characters that are difficult to determine otherwise. Among these are the single cell eucaryotes, such as Ciliates and Flagellates, but also many other kinds of small organisms, such as Nematodes, Rotifers, Crustaceans, mites, Annelids or Insect larvae. These organisms constitute the meiofauna in water and soil, which is of profound importance in the ecological network. Efficient ways for monitoring species identity and abundance in the meiofauna should significantly help to understand ecological processes.

Molecular taxonomy with sequence specific oligo-nucleotide probes has been pioneered for bacteria \[[@B1],[@B2]\]. Probes that are specific to particular species or groups of related species can be used in fluorescent in situ hybridization assays to detect the species in complex mixtures or as symbionts of other organisms \[[@B3],[@B4]\]. Alternatively, the microarray technology is increasingly used for this purpose, allowing potentially the parallel screening of many different species. Most of the species-specific sequences that are used so far for this purpose are derived from ribosomal RNA sequences. However, any other sequence is also potentially suitable, as for example mitochondrial D-loop sequences in eucaryotes.

The species-specific probes are usually derived from an alignment of the respective sequences, where conserved and non-conserved regions are directly visible. A program has been developed for ribosomal sequences that helps to build the relevant database, and supports the selection of suitable specific sequences (ARB \[[@B5]\]). In this, a correct alignment is crucial for finding the optimal probes, but alignments are problematical in poorly conserved regions. These, on the other hand, have the highest potential to yield specific probes. Moreover, the current implementation of probe finding calculates only the number of mismatching position to discriminate between the probes, but does not take into account the position of the mismatches within the stretches, which could influence the hybridization behavior. We have therefore devised here a new algorithm that allows working with datasets that need not to be carefully aligned and that takes the position of mismatches along the recognition sequence into account.

The algorithm
