Background
==========

Blood leukocytes are found in two sub-populations constituting the circulating and the marginating pools. The elements of these two sub-populations are interchangeable, i.e., marginated leukocytes return to bloodstream and vice-versa \[[@B1]-[@B3]\]. Therefore, a dynamical equilibrium situation occurs, and blood cell counts should reflect the rate constants of margination and return to circulation of those cells.

Several studies addressed the relationships between the sub-populations of white cells within the blood pool. Among other features, the ratio between the sub-populations under normal conditions \[[@B4]\], under altered states \[[@B4],[@B5]\] and the stability of the equilibrium situation (i.e., to resume a previous value after perturbations, \[e.g., \[[@B6]-[@B8]\]) were approached. It is presently accepted that the blood sub-pools play an important role as a white cell reservoir when increased demands supervene. Increased demands arise in both pathological and non-pathological situations, as during exercise \[[@B9],[@B10]\], burns \[[@B11],[@B12]\], infectious diseases \[[@B13]\], inflammatory processes \[[@B5],[@B14]\], etc.. It is also currently recognized that some hormones acutely alter the dynamics of the blood sub-pools of white cells \[[@B6]-[@B8]\]. In this sense, epinephrine is known to possess a demarginating effect that lasts for less than 1 hour, and such an effect is thought to be the result of changes in the rate constants of margination and return \[[@B2],[@B6]\]. Therefore, the interplay between marginating and circulating leukocytes is a relevant issue that should be taken into account in the interpretation of many results.

On the one hand, it is tacitly assumed that the rate constants of margination and return have higher values than other rate constants related to the dynamics of white blood cells (see below). On the other hand, there is no study addressing such an issue in a formal way in order to provide good estimation of these values. The aim of the present study is to provide the theoretical background to perform estimations of these rate constants, which may prove relevant for empirical studies on healthy normal situations as well as under altered states of the organisms.

Constructing the extensive model
