Background
==========

Most current methods of cancer early detection, such as mammography or cervical cytology, are based on anatomic changes in tissues or morphologic changes in cells. Recently, various molecular markers, such as protein or genetic changes have been proposed for cancer early detection \[[@B1]-[@B4]\]. This has spurred many investigators with long-term cohort studies to serially collect and store blood or tissue specimens. The aim is to later perform a nested-case control study, where specimens from subjects with a particular type of cancer (cases) and specimens from a random sample of subjects without the cancer (controls) are tested for various molecular markers. Sometime this sort of study is called a retrospective longitudinal study \[[@B6]\] although retrospective longitudinal data could arise in other ways, as well. Unlike cross-sectional study designs, the markers are measured on specimens collected well before the onset of clinical disease in cases. This avoids the potential confounding effect of the target disease on the marker.

For example, in the ATBC (alpha-tocopherol, beta-carotene) \[[@B7]\] and CARET \[[@B8]\] studies, subjects were randomized to placebo or drug to in a long-term study to determine the effect of the drug on lung cancer mortality. During the course of the trial serum was serially collected and stored in a biorepository. In a subsequent nested case-control study, stored serum samples from all cases of prostate cancer and a random sample of controls were tested for prostate-specific antigen (PSA).

Importantly the nested case-control study of early detection biomarkers may be distinct from the original long-term study from which serum were collected. It is designed to answer a different question, it typically studies subjects with a different disease, and it often ignores the intervention in the original long-term study.

Methods
