Background
==========

Nerve growth factor (NGF), a prototypical neurotrophic factor and a member of the neurotrophin family, promotes a wide range of responses in its target cells. These range from neuronal differentiation, maintenance of survival, and regulation of metabolic activities \[for review see \[[@B1]-[@B3]\]. Many of these actions include and require transcriptional regulation \[[@B4],[@B5]\]. However, the greater part of the changes in gene expression that underlie the NGF response remain to be elucidated. The PC12 line of rat pheochromocytoma cells \[[@B6]\] has proved to be a particularly favorable system for detecting NGF-responsive changes in gene expression \[[@B7]-[@B11]\]. These cells resemble sympathico-pheochromo-blasts and upon exposure to NGF cease proliferation and acquire, in a transcription dependent mechanism, many of the properties of post-mitotic sympathetic neurons including neurite outgrowth and electrical excitability. The robust nature of the response of PC12 cells to NGF coupled with their capacity to be examined both before and at various times after exposure to the factor has greatly facilitated study of the NGF mechanism of action, including gene regulation \[[@B12]\].

To obtain a comprehensive and quantitative over-view of NGF-promoted gene regulation, we \[[@B11]\] have used SAGE (Serial Analysis of Gene Expression). In this technique \[[@B13]-[@B15]\] cellular transcripts are converted to SAGE \"tags\" which are sequenced, quantified and, in many cases, matched with known genes. By comparing SAGE profiles for cells in different states (as for example before and after exposure to NGF), it is thus possible to obtain a comprehensive view of gene expression and regulation. Moreover, if a sufficient number of SAGE tags are analyzed, changes in expression levels of individual transcripts can be associated with a high level of statistical significance \[[@B13]\].

Initial analysis of approximately 157,000 SAGE tags from PC12 cells cultured without or with NGF for 9 days revealed nearly 800 transcripts (of a total of at least 21,000) that are regulated by ± 6-fold or greater in response to NGF \[[@B11]\]. Of these, approximately 150 were assignable to named genes of known functions that regulate cellular behaviors ranging from actin and microtubule cytoskeleton assembly/disassembly, gene transcription, RNA processing, neurotransmission, and energetics. A variety of criteria supported the reliability of the quantitative findings revealed by our SAGE analysis \[[@B11]\].

In the present study, we have extended our SAGE profiling of naïve and long-term NGF-treated PC12 cells to over 163,000 tags representing over 22,000 unique transcripts. Analysis of these reveals the presence of transcripts encoding 74 different ribosomal proteins (RPs). Surprisingly, we find that long-term NGF exposure leads to statistically significant changes in relative abundance of at least half of these transcripts by factors of up to nearly 5-fold. In addition, a time course for one of the RP transcripts (encoding RP L9) reveals that its relative abundance begins to change within 1 hr and is maximally regulated by 8 hr of NGF exposure.
